Matter is normally classified as being in one of three states: solid, liquid, or gas. Often this classification system is extended to include a fourth state of matter, called a plasma. Everyday experience tells us that a solid has a definite volume and shape. A brick, for example, maintains its familiar shape and size day in and day out. A liquid has a definite volume but no definite shape. When you fill the tank on a lawn mower, the gasoline changes its shape from that of the original container to that of the tank on the mower, but the original volume is unchanged. A gas differs from solids and liquids in that it has neither definite volume nor definite shape. Because gas can flow, however, it shares many properties with liquids. All matter consists of some distribution of atoms or molecules. The atoms in a solid, held together by forces that are mainly electrical, are located at specific positions with respect to one another and vibrate about those positions. At low temperatures, the vibrating motion is slight and the atoms can be considered essentially fixed. As energy is added to the material, the amplitude of the vibrations increases. A vibrating atom can be viewed as being bound in its equilibrium position by springs attached to neighboring atoms. A collection of such atoms and imaginary springs. We can picture applied external forces as compressing these tiny internal springs. When the external forces are removed, the solid tends to return to its original shape and size. Consequently, a solid is said to have elasticity.
In the gaseous state, molecules are in constant random motion and exert only weak forces on each other. The average distance between the molecules of a gas is quite large compared with the size of the molecules. Occasionally the molecules collide with each other, but most of the time they move as nearly free, noninteracting particles. As a result, unlike solids and liquids, gases can be easily compressed. We'll say more about gases in subsequent chapters. When a gas is heated to high temperature, many of the electrons surrounding each atom are freed from the nucleus. The resulting system is a collection of free, electrically charged particles—negatively charged electrons and positively charged ions. Such a highly ionized state of matter containing equal amounts of positive and negative charges is called a plasma. Unlike a neutral gas, the long-range electric and magnetic forces allow the constituents of a plasma to interact with each other. Plasmas are found inside stars and in accretion disks around black holes, for example, and are far more common than the solid, liquid, and gaseous states because there are far more stars around than any other form of celestial matter.
